the only part of the end of the
Communist Manifesto anybody remembers is
workers of the World Unite yeah we have
nothing to lose but our chance but but
if you just go back one paragraph at the
end right the Communists uh support
every revolutionary movement the
forcible overthrow of all existing
conditions I mean those lines are in the
the next two final paragraphs and that's
what really the manifesto is all about
[Music]
hi everybody I have the privilege of
speaking with Paul kengor today he's
written a book many books one of them is
for example the Crusader Ronald Reagan
and the fall of Communism this is going
to be made in a into a movie I just
interviewed the lead actor for that
movie couple of weeks ago um denn Quaid
and so that'll be releasing a movie will
be releasing at the end of August Paul
is also the editor of the American
spectator and this month's V version has
a list of the best conservative colleges
in the United States and so that could
be a very helpful list for those of you
who are thinking about going to college
or who have children who are thinking
about going to college so that's the
American spectator and so but what we're
concentrating on today is actually a
different book The devil and Karl Marx
and I really like this book not least
because it delves into Karl Marx's work
as a poet and a playwright and it sheds
light I think on the underlying
structure of his motivation for the
so-called economic theories that he
developed later and so we discuss the
meph mephistophelian nature of the
fantasies the poetic fantasies that Karl
Marx developed as a young man and how
that
ethos that F fian
ethos uh what would you say shaped and
crafted the murderous doctrine that he
developed as a pist and a so-called
Economist so join us for that so welcome
Paul I just read your book The Devil and
Karl Marx recently and uh there was a
lot of it was striking to me for a
couple of
reasons I suppose reasons that are more
idiosyncratic to me there are many
reasons that it's of general interest
but so the first one
was one of the things I noticed about my
students especially the ones that were
really searching is that if I gave them
free reign to write an essay they'd
often either they'd include or want to
show me a poem that was relevant to that
Pursuit and then my first book maps of
meaning actually started as about a
40-page poem
wow well and so so I know where you're
going with this okay okay so well so I
studied yung's analysis of creative
thought a lot and Yung had this notion
which I think is right that when we
first investigate something that we
don't understand we fantasize about it
right which in some ways seems so
obvious that it hardly needs to be said
but it does need to be said because you
fantasize about it or you dream about it
or you daydream about it and what you're
doing is you're using what you already
have a grip on to get a new grip on this
indeterminate object and that's fantasy
and and so you have it's like you have
the
dream and then you have the drama no you
have the drama and then you have the
dream and then you have something like
the poem because the a poem is where the
dream meets the verbal and then you can
you can differentiate that further so it
becomes more and more semantic and more
explicit now this is a long way of
asking you this question one of the
things you took pains to do in this book
was to concentrate on some of Marx's
work before he was an economist because
he wrote drama and he wrote poetry and
so um and your claim in the book is that
well we should really be paying
attention to some of that early work
because it does something like set the
frame it sheds light on his motivation
and it also sheds light on the story
that he was imagining or acting out so
do you can you make some comments about
that yeah so this is quite fascinating I
think you should write the next
forward the forward for this one was
written by Michael nolles a colleague
colleague of yours a daily wire um yeah
yeah so Marx fancied himself a poet I I
I mean Marx's secret love was poetry in
fact um one of his I think is the most
important biographer and this guy has
been it's kind of Fallen people just
don't know about him today no one had
anything against him really but his name
was Robert uh Robert Payne so he was a
British academic man of letters the Arts
a translator drama I mean he was no
right-winger he was probably probably
slightly left of center he did a couple
um did several works on marks late 60s
late 60s early 1970s uh published by New
York University press Simon and Schuster
so you know very in and uh he was really
the first one to mine Marx's poetry to
go through and and figure it out how
much of it is there how much po well
there's quite a bit and and it's it's
deeply disturbing stuff all right it a
lot of it is about the devil you know
quite literally about the devil it's
chilling right U you thus Heaven I
forfeited I Know It full well my heart
once true to God is chosen for hell
right 18 straight Lucifer from from
Milton yeah 1837 that one was it was one
of his first published writings he would
have only been 19 years old at that time
um another one so it's called the player
and it was
1841 and here he puts himself it appears
in uh in the form of this kind of mad
violinist who's like frenetically
maniacally sawing away at the violin and
he's summoning up the powers of Darkness
and he's doing this in front of his love
interest and the love interest yeah
right and the love interest um Robert
Payne says appears to be um his girl at
the time Jenny the girl that he would
that he would end up marrying and he's
summoning up the powers of darkness and
she's saying why are you doing this to
to him it's like a fian bargain Mor and
f and g mephistophiles in a moment but
just to sort of set the table for people
who are shocked by what I I said about
him writing about the devil so here's
what he says in the player here's just
one stands up
he tells the girl look now my blood Dark
Sword shall stab unerringly within thy
Soul the hellish Vapors rise and fill
the brain till I go mad and my heart is
utterly changed see the sword the Prince
of Darkness sold it to me for he beats
the time and gives the signs ever more
boldly I play the dance of death and
then he he plays this sort of fian
bargain and the but but but but to back
up a little bit that's his poetry from
from an early age and Robert Payne so
who wrote um the book The Simon and
Schuster book The the New York
University press said Marx's First Love
was poetry and he fancied himself as
aspiring to be nothing less than the
Gerta of his age to write the faou of
his age and Gus F of course the the
famous character is the mephistophiles
character the devil demon character M
and um as you saw in the book many times
and mephistophiles and Fa that's a
character I've done a fair bit of study
about because well there's there's
there's a lot there's a a motif that's
repeated both in f one and f 2 so
mephistophiles in faou is a variant of
the ad the Heavenly adversary right so
he's he opposes being itself he's and
his ethos which Gira has him state twice
is that
the suffering that
existence the suffering that's a
necessary consequence of existence in
its finite and limited manifestation so
our mortal frames let's say that
suffering is so unbearable and so
unconscionable that it would be better
if existence itself did not exist yeah
that's so well so what what what Satan
does in in
girth's conceptualization is make the
case that life is so unfair in its
fundament he's like the antinatalists
the modern antinatalist that anyone
ethical would act in order to bring
being itself to a sensation right now
the problem with that seems to be as far
as I can tell and this is the problem
with anti-natalism one of many problems
is that the reason that mephistophiles
is antibe hypothetically is because of
the suffering but the problem is is if
you turn that into a political Doctrine
right all you do is multiply the
suffering yes right because you become
anti-life and so you might say well I'm
working for the cessation of suffering
because I'm working for the extinction
of Consciousness but if the price you
pay for that is the endless
multiplication of suffering then Marxism
well well that's the that's the horri
well that's partly why I found your book
so horrifying is that because all that's
in principle lurking beneath the surface
okay so what what do you what do you
make of this conceptually now Marx
proclaimed himself an a M okay so the
first question you might ask is well
what the hell does an atheist have to do
with Satan right right well so what so
what do you think about that and and and
by the way he he had a favorite line
from
mephistophiles which was uh in fact they
said this was Marx's favorite quote
everything that exists deserves perish
exactly that's exactly the line
everything that exists deserves to
perish and that's repeated it's in F to
too that's that's his favorite line so
if someone were to ask me do you have a
favorite quote do you have a favorite
line I might give a scripture verse I
might be Not Afraid something like that
but Mark said ah yes yes mephistophiles
you know gea's f everything that exists
deserves to perish that's terrifying
perish well it's terrifying because it
truly is the case that as the character
of mephistophiles is revealed in FA in
FA 1 and two that's the apotheosis of
his philosophy right when you really
start to understand who mephistophiles
is that's the final Revelation he's the
the foe of everything that exists now
the rationalization is because of the
suffering or it isn't just the suffering
he because there's a luciferian pride
element mephistophiles is opposed to the
structure of being also because it
doesn't meet his standard right right in
one of the in one of the poems Mark
shouts in the form of Satan right I
shall howl gigantic curses at
Mankind and and and Robert Payne says
picture Mark standing there in the
middle of like a burned down Village
yeah a burnt down house right the raised
Rez building and Flames all around him
you know everything that exists deserves
to perish and as if to say now we can
begin right he wants to take everything
down he wants to completely level it and
yet all of this going back to your
original point this is what he was
writing before he was doing anything on
economics before he was doing and and
and also yet at the same time uh because
I know there might be some Marx
biographers who've ignored this I know
they've ignored it and they might say
well it's so early he did this as one of
his first published writings
1837 he was 19 years old that's not the
real marks well the one I just read to
you the player that's
1841 that was the same year that he
started with Bruno Bower at the
University of bond as professor of the
archives of atheism the annals of
atheism Journal that he started his his
peak of writing was really in the 1840s
I mean they were writing the Communist
Manifesto 1846 1847 released February
1848 so he's it's not that long it's not
that long well the other thing too is
that if the if the hypothesis that we
described at the beginning of this
discussion is true and I truly believe
it is the like a complex set of ideas
comes out of a dreamlike matrix and you
could make the case that someone
radically shifts their view away from
that initial Revelation but that isn't
generally how things work and I think
you need very strong evidence of
discontinuity not to accept the default
proposition that continui is the much
more likely occurrence I mean one of the
things I do in in my interviews with the
people that I'm fortunate enough to
interview all of whom are accomplished
people is an autobiographical analysis
and it's invariably the case that you
can trace the seeds of you can trace who
they are to two seeds that made
themselves manifest very early now you
might say well that's all retrospective
memory but I don't believe that because
one of the things I've noticed in doing
that kind of interviewing is that the
people who tell the story are shocked
themselves at how much of what they
still do was there in inent form right
like even when they were children and so
now my sense Marx's father saw that yeah
right Mark's father Heinrich Mars in the
letter that he wrote to him in
1837 and that was uh
not long probably well in that letter he
talks about the disorder in Marx's life
and I know and I know you write a lot
about order including in your most
recent book and the Marx was all about
tearing down the traditional order in
fact in fact um he he said he and Eng
Les wrote In The Communist Manifesto
communism represents the most radical
rupture in traditional relations the
most radical conceivable disruption
right so
the most radical right and and the one
word that was the goal yeah that was the
goal and the one word well two words
that jump out of the Communist Manifesto
all of Marx and engle's writings to
criticism and Marx wrote to Arnold Rouge
in 1843 called for the ruthless
criticism of everything that exists
right right same thing and by the way
not just you know people thinking about
this not just for the ruthless criticism
of you know the bad things in society
right of of that malady or this ill the
ruthless criticism of everything that
exists yeah and the other word that they
that they use all the time is abolition
abolish they want to abolish everything
right um communism communism calls for
the abolition of the present state of
things they said in the manifesto so
after they talk about the entire theory
of the Communist may be summed up in the
single sentence abolition of private
property all right so that's gone
abolition of capital yeah in the
manifesto they write abolition of the
family exclamation mark right even the
most radical flare up of this Infamous
proposal of the Communists so we've got
Capital Property family um present state
of things entire societies I mean just
it it's
complete so one person said to me it's
nihilism right but in a sense he has
kind of a go it's worship of Destruction
exactly that's different
care right right right right no no this
is way different no no that if if he's
an avid devote of mephistophiles it's
active destruction you don't want to
underestimate the the the fact that a
poetic line takes root in someone's Soul
especially when it's produced by someone
as profound as F like that that's not
nothing that that really means that Marx
identified the central Spirit of
mephistophiles he pulled out the Central
message and that's stuck in his memory
right and then okay so let's stuck in
his memory and integrated into his
worldview right into into what he loved
doing the most writing poetry so so it's
really fully deeply a part of him and um
yeah it's it's uh well you also you also
talk in the book a fair bit about the
sorted details of his private life I
mean Marx was also by all accounts a
person who was filthy in every way
essentially that you could be filthy
like literally because his personal
hygiene habits were detestable to say
the least but he also lived in an well
you're better you're better at
explaining this than me so do you want
to walk people through that and I would
I would Circle this back to the point of
disorder right exactly so it is a
totally disordered personal lifestyle um
the his father noticed it when Marx was
in college and then when Marx got
married his life was a wreck and and
both his mother and his wife both
Express the wish that Carl would Carl
would start earning some Capital right
rather than just writing about it they
the family had to beg for money all the
time everywhere that they went that so
first they got the money from Carl's
father all right and then when he died
and by the way marks didn't attend the
funeral of his father some biographers
have said that's because it was out of
spite against his father another
biographer says biographer says he just
couldn't make it there maybe because of
the weather I don't know but but he
didn't go to the funeral of his father
he was interested in his father's money
and the the one letter that I quote from
his father the father's like okay here's
what you really want I will give you the
money for whatever whatever whatever so
he clearly knows that the son wants
money after the father died he went to
visit his mother who he wasn't close to
at all he was at least a little close to
the father and the goal was to get money
from from the old lady and he writes a
letter back to Jenny his wife ahead of
time basically reporting that well I
really didn't get much money out of the
old lady but she did agree to burn up
the
IUS so in other words success right I at
least got her to do that and then Jenny
would go begging to her relatives and in
one case well she was from a rich family
correct yeah fairly well-off family and
that family eventually got to the point
of tough love they had to cut her off as
well and both um her family and also
Marx's wider family all knew that when
Jenny or Marx came knocking on the door
it was because they wanted money so they
lived in economic disarray economic
disarray and to the point where Jenny's
family got to the point where they said
okay look we know that you and Carl have
all these kids we know that you need
money these are our grandchildren we
feel bad for you Jenny we can't give you
any more money we we just we just we
can't do it so the family lends to the
Marx family the family nursaid now this
is a woman named Helen deuth who was
called Lenin so the nickname was Lenin
she grew up with j
so Jenny's parents say okay we will we
will lend you Lenton to help the family
out rather than giving you more money so
lenon basically here's KL Marx champion
of the proletariat the working class
right doesn't pay her a dime never gives
her any money yeah well that sets the
stage for the later communist
revolutions that's right in fact really
what big tech companies enrich
themselves by taking your personal data
they grab your web history email
metadata and video searches to create a
detailed profile on you and then they
sell that off to the highest bidder
companies aren't just selling products
anymore they're selling you to protect
your identity and data from these Tech
Giants I recommend using expressvpn
every time you go online think about all
the websites you visit everything you do
and say online is tracked using your
public IP address which allows them to
uniquely match your activity and know
your location expressvpn makes you
anonymous online by camouflaging your IP
address and replacing it with a
different secure IP of your choice
expressvpn also encrypts all of your
data to protect it from hackers and
anyone else who might try to spy on you
what I like most about expressvpn though
is how easy it is to use just download
the app on your phone or computer tap
one button and you're protected so if
you're like me and you believe your
internet data belongs to you then
expressvpn is the answer protect your
online data today by visiting
expressvpn.com Jordan
expressvpn.com Jord Jordan and you can
get an extra 3 months free that's
expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan that's right in fact really what
he's developing is kind of the ideal
world that he wants for himself which is
that other people will pay for him to do
whatever he does in the library the
writing the research so at one point
Marx has sex with Lenin behind Jenny's
back and she got pregnant now Robert
Payne says that he thinks that the sex
might have been non-consensual that it
could have been rape but I don't know
how he would know that but either way
Lenin got pregnant Marx refused to admit
that the child was his everybody knew
the child was his Jenny knew it in fact
Jenny was crushed I mean her heart was
broken she never really forgave her
husband for this the um the child
friederick Engles steps up now the Marx
family gets most of their money at this
point from Engles Engles becomes the
Marx family's sugar daddy I mean he's
not just just a partner with Marx Engles
inherited all this money from his from
his wealthy industrialist father's
inheritance and so he subsidizes not
just Carl but the Marx family so Engles
who doesn't believe in marriage all
right these guys were against marriage
long before anybody else was Engles has
various women that he Shacks up with
which in that day is really unusual I
mean that was scandalous you didn't live
with a woman that you weren't married to
and a lot of these women wanted Eng Les
you know Friedrich to marry them make
honest women out of them one of them um
one of them died and uh Engles was
really crushed by it really
brokenhearted Marx writes him a letter
and he kind of acknowledges Eng Les loss
in the first couple sentences and then
he gets straight to the point of asking
for for more money Eng Les just raged
back in a letter even my bour bourgeois
friend showed more compassion and and
interest than you did but uh but the
point of Lenin so Eng Les um doesn't
care about his reputation everyone knows
he doesn't believe in marriage so he
steps forward Helen deuth lynchin gives
birth to this baby boy and Engles says
I'll accept paternity let's let's give
him the name friederick so the son is
known as Freddy Marx never acknowledges
his existence never acknowledges that
it's his kid of course never gives him a
penny just like he never gave a penny to
lenon um and by the way that poor kid
Freddy ended up Surviving all the Marx
family um Marx of the six kids he and
Jenny had four of them died before they
did he and Jenny and then the two girls
that survived both committed suicide in
suicide packs with their husbands and by
drinking poison and as you noticed in
the Mark's poetry a recurring theme in
all of his poetry is about the couples
coming together the one the pale Maiden
which sounds like a late night be movie
horror flick this pale Maiden you know
she drinks Hemlock she commits Comm
suicide lovers committing suicide and
suicide packs that's how Marx's two
daughters died but uh but the but the
family it was a complete wreck the
household the house was in complete
disarray there are German police reports
from 1848 1849 on how one of them says
uh trying to take a seat in the in the
Marx household is a dangerous Enterprise
or something like that because the chair
could break from under you um it was it
was dirty the landlords kick them out
the landlords would would cut off the
heat Marx um suffered from boils car
bunes which um Paul Johnson the late
British historian said you know people
don't consider this but dos capitel is
kind of this long agonizing painful to
read work Marx's carbunkle on his bottom
were at their worst when he was writing
dos capitel um he had them on his uh on
his private parts on his penis to the
point where they would sometimes set him
in you know into these
uh outbursts of Rage he wrote one letter
to Eng Les he said I have this boil
between my upper lip and my nose it's
like the devil has been hurling
excrement at me use the word t uh
but but he suffered and the doctors triy
to figure out boy why is why does Marx
have all these boils and carb buckles no
one else in that home seems to have them
well the answer is he wouldn't bathe the
guy refused to bathe ma tongue refused
to bathe um a lot of some of the these
Communists were like this but he was a
very disordered individual at so many
different areas of his life even his
research and we could probably talk
about this later you and I are both phds
we've done academic social science
research markx never went into the field
or the factory I mean he wrote about the
proletariat from you know from the
Vantage from the from the library from a
from a desk from a desk in the library
in London or or at his home he never
actually did real field research and if
you read The Communist Manifesto it is
not the work of an economist it is more
like a pmic it's more like a
philosophical statement um he said once
the the revolution that began in the
brain of the monk that would be Martin
Luther he says this in opium of the
masses essay um will now begin in the
brain of the philosopher so he really
fancies himself a philosopher and a poet
a poet above all he's really not an
economist if he is yeah well that was
well that was probably an accurate
self-characterization because yeah his
work really I know there are economists
who've Fallen under his sway let's say
but his work really served the purpose
of motivational Doctrine right so the
typical writings of an economist aren't
taken up by the masses as a rallying
point right but poetry and philosophy
can be taken up as a rallying point and
so and that's what this book does right
I mean if you read if you actually read
The Communist Manifesto which most young
people who say well if you read The
Communist Manifesto It's a pretty good
book it talks about sharing they haven't
read it they haven't read it it's it's
about that thick okay the one I have in
mind the 1998 penguin Classics Edition
edited by Martin Malia is 56 Pages yeah
with in my Marxism course at Grove City
College every every spring semester we
read it it's only 56 Pages it's not long
but but it is a um you're right if it
was an economics uh work or track I mean
it would have data it had information it
wouldn't be anything that could rally
anybody right but but this is more like
um uh like like a Jefferson Declaration
of Independence right and except it same
that the
Mephisto mephistophelian aim right
polar opposite but in the sense of in
the sense of Adams and Franklin saying
you know we need a kind of statement
here to Rally everybody for this who can
write that Jefferson's a great writer
right 33 years old fantastic writer you
know one of the course of human events
just puts it out and of course in his
case it's truth and it's inspiring but
what Mark sits down to write is just
kind of this pmic the the the Communist
Manifesto is kind of a DI tribe it's
it's really um there's a lot of anger in
there there's a lot of um catchphrases
kind of revolutionary catchphrases a guy
who could really turn a phrase y I mean
that was Mark radical leftists are very
good at turning phrases they really are
yeah gender affirming care there a
stroke of Genius diversity equity and
inclusivity right seriously like there
like once those slogans slogan you know
what the derivation word slogan is right
this is so funny what's that it comes
from the Welsh two words SLU and GM slag
is s l u a g H and gam is g h a i r m
slag garam battlecry of the dead that's
what a slogan is oh it's so perfect
right because it it it it conjures up
images of armies of the Dead fighting
against the living yeah yeah that's what
slogan is oh yes no kidding yeah yeah he
was really good at sloganeering in fact
to the point where the only part of the
end of the Communist Manifesto anybody
remembers is workers of the World Unite
yeah we have nothing to lose but our
but you know people just back according
to their need is pretty damn good that's
a good one too that's a good one but but
if you just go back one paragraph at the
end right the Communists uh support
every revolutionary movement um uh the
forcible overthrow of all existing
conditions I mean those lines are in the
the next two final paragraphs and that's
what really the manifesto is all about
okay so let's I want to go get back to a
question that we touched on but didn't
fully address what in the world is an AE
absolutely why is an atheist toying with
not toying with centered on what would
you say analysis of and identification
with religious tropes yeah right now he
claims atheism but you don't write a FTI
poem being in League with mephistophiles
is not technically atheism now you might
ask about the relationship between the
two but that's a question but so what do
you make of the fact that he was
obsessed with these fian Notions and
with ideas of conjuring up the
underworld despite his professed atheism
yeah by the way even the phrase from
each according to his ability to
according to his needs that's a that's a
twisting of the scripture right of the
New Testament right right right but in
his case so uh yeah and people have
asked me this they say well if he had
this fascination with the devil um it
must have only been in a kind of
rebellious sort of way like like M yeah
right like mle bakunin um sa Alinsky in
the intro to Rules for Radicals right
Les we forget at least an overthe
shoulder acknowledgement to that first
of all Rebels who won himself his own
kingdom yeah lest we forget yeah no
kidding yeah you you don't walk by that
sort of statement accidentally no
definitely not and a lot of people on
the left do they're like well he's just
being right while those are the same
people who think that Milton's Lucifer
is a hero lots of people thought that
and give their magazines names like the
Jacobin of absolutely why the hell would
you name your magazine after a group
that gillotin 40,000 people in France in
1793 1794 absolutely well I've also
noticed that I've read a lot of comments
by online Anonymous trolls a lot and
I've looked at their names and there's a
sizable minority of the really vicious
online trolls who adopt satanic names
absolutely more than far more than you'd
expect and it's not cute or funny no and
not in the least and it sums up the
manner in which they deal with the world
with much more accuracy than they might
imagine yeah when they've had the what
would you call it unmitigated goal to
DARE such a thing right right in fact in
fact one one of them and I won't say who
it is because she could end up watching
this but um it's somebody I know the
name of the magazine and her pen name I
won't give the first name but the last
name is diavo right right a v o l o
which is Italian for devil right and um
I mean what does that tell
you n plume of all things Dio it is the
question what does it tell you because
the people who well the people who pick
that would say well Lucifer is
misunderstood because he's just a rebel
against tyranny sure right and so that's
their that's their standard uh the devil
is misunderstood he's just a rebel
against tyranny that's how mle bakunin
who was one of Marx's Associates God in
the state he wrote about Lucifer in this
heroic way and he was an atheist now in
Marx's case all right um so he he wasn't
an atheist in 1837 when he wrote that
first poem okay uh even in by 1841 was
he an atheist probably let me back up
well the question is was he ever an
atheist you know what I mean because if
he's stated his allegiance to
mephistophiles True when he's 19 or 20
and that's actually the motif of his
writings he's never an atheist he might
not be very pleased with the idea of God
but that's not exactly the same thing as
being an atheist and and they also end
up putting their faith in Marxism
leninism in an almost religious like way
Ronald Reagan well Marxism leninism that
religion of theirs yeah the Opium of the
intellectuals is what Raymond Aron Aaron
called it yeah but but in Marx's case s
me back up a little bit so he's born May
5th 1818 in uh in Trier Germany Trier is
spelled like tribe t r i e r a a very
religious city right right I mean like
90% Roman Catholic the great Cathedral
of TR was found founded around the year
320 330 it was paid for by um St Helena
the mother of Constantine of all people
right oh really so it's that early yeah
yeah exactly that early and so um and by
the way it is also the birth town of St
Ambrose who was the the Bishop of Milan
later who brought Augustine into the
faith so Ambrose and Mars are both from
Trier Germany of all things so you have
this Cathedral and Trier St Helena is
the one that goes to the the holy land
and brings back all kinds of relics all
right in fact she believes that she
found the holy Lance which is um pierce
the side of Christ and that is at the
Vatican today she found she believes the
crown of thorns which is in notredam mhm
she believed that found the holy robe
that Jesus wore at the crucifixion that
the Roman soldiers cast lots for at the
foot of the cross the holy robe is in
that cathedral in Trier by the way Marx
in his
1841 um poem the player right which is
actually a play because you you mention
drama a lot of these plays are actually
dramas as well uh his his demonic
violinist who's summoning up the powers
of Darkness Marx not only wrote the
character and the word
he also wrote um the uh the stage the
production the furniture on the stage
the clothes people would wear the
violinist is wearing the holy robe of
Christ from the cathedral and Tra while
he's summoning up I mean chilling
chilling of all things and there's a
letter between Marx and Jenny whose wife
who's an atheist and at one point when
everyone's coming to town for like the
annual sort of Festival where people
come in to venerate the robe yeah
Jenny's making fun of them like oh these
silly people right uh but but but so in
Marx's case he's born May 5th 1818 in
Trier he was baptized in
1824 now he's he's a Jew the family he
comes from a very Jewish Family not just
in terms of of ethnicity but Judaism
they are religious Jews they're Orthodox
Jews uh a bunch of rabbis in the family
uh his father had converted to
Christianity to Lutheranism specifically
Heinrich marks and some say that he did
because of social pressers in Germany in
the day anti-Semitism and perhaps so
maybe um he had an uncle who converted
to Roman Catholicism which most people
there did because it was like 90% Roman
Catholic but Marx's father converted to
Lutheranism and Marx's father died a
Believer right it's probably kind of a
more liberal Christian but he was a
Christian so Marx converts uh Marx is
baptized 1824 he would have been five or
six years old um his mother really
didn't want him to the mother really
didn't want to convert but Marx is a
fairly dedicated Christian through his
teenage years and he really doesn't
start to change until college and he
came in particular any idea what
happened well he came under the
influence it's hard I had a hard time
pinning this down and I don't think
there's enough good information and um
you'll appreciate this as a fellow
academic so many academics don't give a
damn about faith at all I mean the the
the first biography that I set out to do
on Ronald Reagan um and I've written I
think eight books on Reagan was going to
be about him and the end of the Cold War
and um I ended up writing a book called
God and Ronald Reagan because I found
all this stuff on Reagan's faith that no
one had talked oh yeah yeah I thought
look at all this look at all this look
at all these letters he well that's
particularly relevant in the context of
this conversation yeah yeah he wow look
in this letter to this Methodist
Minister who's having doubts about
Christ Divinity Reagan's Lew it using
the liar Lord or lunatic argument of CS
Lewis right picked up on that but but so
many of these biographers ignore Faith
so Marx's case I'm one of the only ones
that really cared right a lot of the
Marx biographers are leftists so they so
they ignore all of this stuff um I'm
getting off track no no that's the um
the first main Marx biographer fron
Maring this would have been over a
hundred years ago was the first to
discover the demonic poetry and plays
and he presented them to Marx's daughter
and he said you
know we should this stuff shouldn't see
the light of day I mean this is this is
bad I mean this is really damning and a
communist with some Integrity is it
David renov with a Marx Engles Institute
in the 1920s found all of it and said no
for the sake of you know we we need to
put this stuff out there so people know
what what marks believed so so he
actually found it first published it it
it's untouched until Robert Payne
mentions it late 1960s early 1970s Paul
Johnson wrote about it and intellectuals
uh Pastor Richard warron who was uh
tortured in the Romanian prison of pesti
wrote a books called Marx and Satan he
wrote about it but all the other Marx
biographers they just ignore it they
completely ignore it it's a long way of
saying um how how and why exactly did he
become an atheist what happened between
those teenage years and college Years
that really flipped him the best that I
can determine he came under the
influence of a professor in college
named Dr fancy that yeah right exactly
imagine that named Dr Bruno Bower
University of bond and he was a
professor of theology who was an atheist
right imagine that just like the
colleges say he's eventually run out of
the University but he and Marx became
very tight very close interestingly too
Bruno Bower was intensely
anti-semitic um so close that they
together um so Bower influences Marx's
atheism they start a journal together
called anals of atheism which never gets
off the ground partly because they don't
have money to support it I guess they
couldn't find a wealthy atheist
socialists who could who could help him
out so they start this archives of uh an
this anals of atheism and then Bow's
eventually fired from the University
he's pushed out of the university and he
and marks pulled a couple stunts in one
case they went to a nearby Village on um
for Palm Sunday and rode in on donkeys
together kind of mocking the entrance of
Christ into Jerusalem on on Palm mocking
or imitating right well you have the
same weird dichotomy there with the
character in the play that you described
is like you know are you are mocking or
usurping that's a better that's a better
metaphor yes absolutely well because
Lucifer I don't like the word channeling
that people use today but usurping
usurping is good because Lucifer is a
usurper right I mean he's the spirit
that wants to over throw everything and
put himself at the top and not just
himself but his intellect specifically
yes and that's very reminiscent of the
way Marx conducted himself in his life
right everything around him including
his family his wife his friends
everything was sacrificed to the
glorification of his intellect right in
this and and like well and this is
exactly what happens in the fan bargain
right I mean faou essentially sells his
soul to for what would you say
intellectual Supremacy right well
there's a good diagnosis for the
universities for today too but it is the
it's the fundamental temp temptation of
the intellect right because it's it is
the highest angel in God's Heavenly
Kingdom most capable of going bitterly
wrong right and Marx is a great example
of that and finding his own kingdom
which is what Alinsky liked about
him starting a business can be tough but
thanks to Shopify running your online
storefront is easier than ever Shopify
is the global Commerce platform that
helps you sell at every stage of of your
business from the launch your online
shop stage all the way to the did we
just hit a million orders stage Shopify
is there to help you grow our marketing
team uses Shopify every day to sell our
merchandise and we love how easy it is
to add more items ship products and
track conversions Shopify helps you turn
browsers into buyers with the internet's
best converting checkout up to 36%
better compared to other leading
e-commerce platforms no matter how big
you want to grow Shopify gives you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level
sign up for a $ per month trial period
at shopify.com jbp go to shopify.com jbp
now to grow your business no matter what
stage you're in that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbp think of the um arrogance that it
requires to be a Critic like a
devastating critic of everything not in
the not in the um not in the manner that
deart questioned that's not the same
thing right questioning is more an
admission of your own inadequacy but
that damning critique of everything like
the question is who the hell do you
think you you know the the kids who shot
up the Coline high school that's the
position they put themselves in like
they're writing which no one pays any
attention to is absolutely bone chilling
like there there's no difference between
the writing of the more literate of the
two and something that you would expect
from someone who's manifesting signs of
for lack of a better word possession
it's really chilling stuff this is
independent of your religious belief
like you can't read what he wrote
without the hairs on the back of your
neck standing up and he
literally positioned himself as the
judge of everything he believed human
life was inadequate he believed
everything should be destroyed him and
his friend were planning a much more
destructive Rampage than they managed
and they had fantasies and wrote and
wrote about destroying entire cities
they wanted to lay everything waste
exactly in that mephistophelian manner
and you see that in Mark's poetry as
well I I mean Mark says I mean in one
case he's like jury and executioner
right again I shall how J curses at
Mankind and and um in the mockery it's a
good point I mean because uh the devil
hates to be mocked but the devil mocks
Christ the devil mocks God right and um
in Marx's case so they're imitating or
mocking the the Christ entering
Jerusalem they would go into churches
together he and Bruno Bower and laugh
and kind of make noise in the Pew just
to be disrespectful so he's um you know
he he's he's an angry and throughout his
life no one liked him I I mean he I
can't imagine why he got along with his
own family uh you know his wife I mean
his family tolerated him some
biographers say that his that he had a
great relationship with his daughters
other that he didn't it's amazing to
complete completely diametrically
different takes on that but all the
different people who worked with him
described him in this like this
dictatorial kind of way and he
eventually split with everybody mckyle
bikunin um forbach I mean all these
different guys they would eventually get
to the point where Marx is calling him
an ape or a baboon and they're saying oh
this is Mark's typical filth and vitriol
and bile this is what he does to
everybody so he eventually got to that
point with just about everybody um but
but but on your point right
so when did he become an atheist so he's
there by
1841 at that point and he's 26 at at
that point he would have been 23 years
old 23 23 and I'd love to really see
some sort of documentation of exactly
how it began to slip away some although
you said that this Association he had
with the professor well that's that's
right that's in some ways a sufficient
explanation like not exactly because it
doesn't explain why he would have been
attracted to that Professor but you
could it's easy to imagine that well
maybe that Professor paid a lot of
attention to him I I think so and the
professor is anti-Semitic and and which
is odd of and Marx is Jewish and markx
ends up with some very anti-semitic
statements he said the Israelite faith
is repulsive to me and he has this one
statement where he talks about in the
end the final emancipation the
emancipation of the it sounds like
something Hitler could have said I mean
some really disturbing statements about
so the tell me about the Emancipation
yeah I should get I'll get that exact
quote okay okay okay I'll get I'll get
that exact quote okay okay so so we
don't know ex okay so we have this sense
that he identified with mephistophiles
which is you not not great and and that
he has a luciferian intellect which is
also not exactly what you'd hope for by
the way Ju Just for the cameras I did a
piece called um Mark uh marks on Judaism
Christianity and Evolution race if you
look that up it has it has that quote on
the Jewish okay okay okay okay so we
don't know we don't know why he turned
to atheism these poems that he wrote
that were pans to to mephistophiles is
that after he becomes an atheist no he's
writing so the first one was
1837 wrote another in 1841 he wrote a
bunch of them and he did um he did a
just a chilling play called Ulan yes um
o u l a n m and people that are watching
this if they now type into their
computer ULM even in Google it'll pop up
played by KL Marx it even has a
Wikipedia entry and uh let me warn
people you might not want to do this but
if you click the images button you will
see I mean you will there's some satanic
stuff up there from like not heavy metal
but like black metal groups so ULM is an
anagram for Emanuel
or uelo so Marx takes Emmanuel which is
the name given to Christ or manuelo and
he flips it into this anagram called
ulam and it's this chilling play the
main character is lendo lucindo Lu u c i
n d o and uh you just can't believe what
what what you're reading with uh with
with with this play so that that was
written later in the 1840s so really the
prime of his writing including the de
when he wrote The Communist Manifesto is
also the same decade uh when he was
writing these these these these poems um
and plays and plays and plays and
throughout his life his kids and others
would say uh yeah he had a favorite line
always from Mephisto everything that
exists deserves to perish so that
remains a part of him uh through
throughout his life um his son Edgar has
a letter where he addresses his father
as my dear devil which I don't know
maybe it's playful I don't know although
I would never you know call my dad my
dear devil his wife called him uh uh my
Wicked Nave I I quote uh Henrik hinen uh
referring to him as a goblin who try to
get take me un under under his spell um
other cases of of where of where he's
using that kind of
language um when Eng Les first met him
he describes him as this dark man from
prer um who Hops and leaps and springs
on his heels the um the the monster of
10,000 Devils he describes him and the
and the letter from his father is um
which was written in 1837 a year a year
before before his before his father
died so his father writes to him March
2nd
1837 Carl at times my heart Delights in
thinking of you and your fortune and yet
at times I cannot rid myself of ideas
which arouse in me sad for boings and
fear when I am struck as if by lightning
by the thought is your heart in accord
with your head your talents has it room
for the Earthly but gentler sediments
which in this veil of Sorrow it's a
beautiful letter in many ways are
essentially consoling for a man of
feeling and then this question from the
father of Carl Marx to his to his at
this point 18-year-old son and since
that heart Carl is obviously animated
and governed by a
demon not granted to all men is that
demon Heavenly or
fian will you ever and that is not the
least painful doubt of my heart will you
ever be capable of truly human domestic
happiness will and this doubt has no
less tortured me since I have come to
love a certain person like my own child
will you ever be capable of imparting
Happiness to those immediately around
you by the way the answer was no
rightly the father had intimations of
that yeah and since that heart is
obviously animated and governed by a
demon not granted to all men is that
demon Heavenly or fian that's his dad
yeah and and there's always so many of
those things I think that a sympathetic
uh Marxist or Marxist biographer can
shrug off I mean there's just so many
statements like that from him and people
about him and people who knew him and
loved ones and uh a wife a son a best
friend from Engles and then the
different writings okay so let's let's
let's attack this now was he a Satanist
right well that is a whole different
thing that I can't personally answer
well it seems not unreasonable to
presuppose that he was a devote of the
Mephisto ethos yeah I think that's right
so the question is you know what
constitutes a Satanist well someone who
generates a murderous doctrine that that
raises questions I mean dead serious
about that like the most murderous
Doctrine ever promoted in the in the
roughly judeo-christian context by by a
large margin so I would say it's
incumbent on those who would defend him
to describe why we wouldn't just assume
that but the like the part of the reason
that I was so interested in talking to
you was because I felt that what you
documented in your book was
extraordinarily telling from the
psychological perspective because I know
how these things work and it it is not
something that can be overlooked that
that that that was his favorite quote
right I mean not especially not when you
understand girth's centrality yeah in
the German intellectual tradition that's
like having a favorite quote from
Shakespeare right and it's it's not any
old quote it's the central Credo of
mephistophiles so that's extraordinar
telling now okay now I do have another
can can I give you a so Robert Payne the
very serious academic no right-winger
British man of letters the guy who
really broke this first in his 1968
biography of Marx all right his chapter
where he talks about this stuff is
called is called the demons and his
Mark's biography now he wrote this and
I'm not saying that I endorse this as an
academic I can't say if this is correct
there were times when Mark seemed to be
possessed by demons that's what Payne
wrote and now this I would at least more
endorse Marx had the devil's view of the
world and the devil's
malignity sometimes he seemed to know
that he was accomplishing works of evil
I think that gets closer to it now uh
Pastor Richard worm brand who wrote the
famous book tortured for Christ and was
tortured for Christ in Romanian prisons
by uh communist captors who were
shouting I am the devil while they were
torturing him he did a book called marks
and Satan he's convinced that Marx was a
Satanist and did some things
ritualistically that it might have even
been satanic but I can't I can't say
that I can't Endor you see evidence of
that in I've never SE in terms of at
least his fantasies that's right that's
right in fact pain even goes so far as
to say Vladimir Lenin right there's a
statement from Lennon which said um when
I was a teen I broke from all religion I
took the cross from my neck and I threw
it in the rubbish bin and and pain has a
quote where not pay uh Richard worm
brand where I think um I think he
believes that lenon even stomped on it
he says well that's a Satanic ritual I
don't know I don't know if it is or not
but there's another case of lennin who
at least did the work of the devil I
mean lennin had according to Robert
Conquest wh Chamberlain the first
historian of the Russian Revolution
500,000 people were killed from 1917 to
1923 under Lenin not even including the
Russian Civil War if that's not the
devil's work I don't know what the hell
is right but but I think uh what Payne
said in the latter quote the devil's
view of the world the devil's malignity
and at the very least this
identification with kind of devilish
like um destruction right tearing
everything down rebelling against the
world everything that exists deserves to
perish um that at least and then the
ideology that he created that just
happened to be responsible for the
deaths of over 100 million people in the
20th century you know more than World
War I and World War II combined so that
ideology was pretty
hellacious yeah to yeah to say the least
okay so and I I think it's very naive
not to assume that the events that we
described in Marx's life are not
connected right yeah right corre that
that that his
economic pmics Were Somehow independent
of his poetic imagination it's like
obviously they weren't because they
wouldn't have had that motivational
Force so they they were calling on Dark
Forces obviously so because otherwise
they wouldn't have compelled people in
that manner especially not toward the
that sort of immense sadistic
murderousness and utter destructiveness
and of course get to the hatred of God
which all the Communists did so all the
Communists thereafter seek to ban
religion right right atheists they're
not exactly atheists because they're
trying to stomp something out that's
right it's not just it's not just it's
not a neutrality that's right it's not a
neutrality toward religion it's not ear
religion it's not separation of church
and state it is militant aggressive
atheism trosky and lendon create the
league of the militant Godless right
they ban religion they have the Moscow
Church trials they blow up churches they
jail priests right um you know the the
sols init and rights in the gulag
archipelago they put nuns in special
sections of the gag with prostitutes
right right deem them hor to Christ AB
Lennon said all worship of a Divinity is
a necrofilia there is nothing more
abominable than religion so they they
don't just try to stop religion they
they want
um ppot the Buddhist monks in Cambodia
yeah to renounce their vows to marry
it's not enough for them to be quiet and
so after years I don't know how you can
separate a militantly anti-religious
atheism from from especially say within
a Christian context from something
approximating
satanic ideology because I don't see how
I don't see how conceptually that
separation is possible it's one thing to
be atheist in the manner that leaves
people to go to hell in a hand basket in
their own way but to be actually an
enemy of the religious Enterprise that's
a whole different thing it is so and and
that obviously Marx and the Communists
were obviously that clearly obviously
and and and and and Satan might say I
don't care if you believe in me or not
you're doing my work man sh down
churches blowing up churches it also
also touches on the issue of what it
means to believe right and I mean you
could imagine someone comparatively
harmless Who toys with ritualistic
satanic activities in a sort of dramatic
Manner and then you can imagine someone
who tortures nuns and Priests and burns
down churches but foros any technical
affiliation with Satan I would say that
the latter is the Satanist in a much
deeper sense than the former not that
what the former is doing is excusable
yeah or Le satanic yes right but but to
to to to do what the Communists did to
the religious Enterprise is evidence of
something far more militant than a mere
atheism yeah so okay okay now here's
something that was bothering me too when
I was reading your book so one of the
things that the radical leftists do that
especially and this is sort of in
proportion to their what would you say
their
intellectual um
arrogance is Elevate themselves on moral
grounds above the great figures of the
past so I can hardly stand going into
art museums anymore because a typical
Art Museum now and this is true even of
the greatest museums in the west is a
great painting with a a little polemic
off to the side written by some art
critic who is basically claiming moral
superiority over the artist because of
their adherence to whatever the current
ideological Doctrine is it's sickening
even though that work of art has has has
survived for six centuries we're still
looking at well but you imagine what a
what a great Advantage it is to the art
critic to be able to claim moral
superiority to a truly great man of the
past without having to actually have
accomplished anything I mean what a deal
right okay so but but there but but I
would like to be very careful in our
conceptualization here because I've
thought the same way about um Fuko yeah
so Fuko was uh a person rather
unpleasant you might say in his personal
habits like seriously unpleasant and so
but but here here's here's our
conundrum in the in the story of Noah
Noah is described as a man who's good in
his generation and it it seems to mean
something like for his time and place he
was a good man and there might be men
that are so good that their goodness
transcends their time and place and I
think we remember men like that but the
typical amount of goodness that you
could expect from someone is that for
their time and place they're good okay
so now the Temptation would be for us to
look back into history to Great figures
of the past and to say we understand
what wasn't good even if we
misunderstand it about their time and
place and then to say well those people
weren't good and we should we are now
morally Superior to them and we can
remove the detrus from our past we can
tear down the statues for example it's
happening in
we're going to tear down the statues of
joh a McDonald who was the founding
prime minister of Canada and we point to
his inadequacies as a person okay so
Churchill sure absolutely chur Churchill
is a great example and that sort of
thing is happening all over the US
now how do you
know that the
leftist criticism of your critique would
be something like has to be something
like you have to separate the man the
work from the
man okay and I have some sympathy for
that because there are like Picasso is a
good example and Picasso by any measure
was a remarkable artist and unbelievably
productive he produced three pieces of
art a day for 65 years right I can't
remember how many tens of thousands of
pieces it's some insane number and and
was revolutionary in that manner but but
wait but by the way the left will not
separate um the accomplishments of the
man from the personal life of the man
when it comes to people they don't like
yes I know I know but how do you they're
very selective okay but but but how do
you how do you as an
academic you can imagine that there
should be some separation between the
products of thought and the personality
of the person right okay so are you
concerned about that in relationship to
your critique of of Marx and Marxism no
it's a great question and and and and
and by the way in case we we don't get
to it um people should know Marx's views
on Race especially toward black people I
mean he he had hideous views toward
black people all stuff that should get
him cancelled I don't believe in
cancelling anybody but the things that
the left is willing to cancel this or
that American figure on because of maybe
a statement about race or somebody owned
slaves I mean what Mark said about black
people's unbelievable you'll be reading
letters in German between Marx and Eng
Les and all of a sudden the nword pops
up you know the American you know
English racial epithet you know g g
it's not like the German word for negro
or black it's like whoa look at that and
and they were um in fact U his daughter
was married to to yeah to a guy named
Paul lefar who was who was I guess
partly Cuban to some degree and Marx and
Eng Les are sitting there trying to
figure out in a letter deducing with
scientific accuracy how much nword blood
is in his veins is it 1/8 it 112 and
they they called him nillo the gorilla
and they made fun of him because he was
black and there's a letter from mles to
Marx's daughter say something like oh
here he's running for office in this
District in Paris well it contains a zoo
uh as as somebody who's um that should
he should be a perfect representative of
that District being somebody who's just
want uh closer to closer to the Apes and
the monkeys than we are uh they they U
Ferdinand Lal who they refer to as the
Jew nword they're looking at his at his
cranial capacity and all kinds of so I
mean very very racist if if Patrice CER
is one of the founders of black lives
matter who calls herself a Marxist knew
what Marx said about race she'd probably
call herself I don't know maybe a
communist but she probably shouldn't
call herself a Marxist uh but in Marx's
case to get to get to your question the
the the personal um what he believed in
his writings and his ideas and the world
the world that he wanted is in fact an
extension of his his personal life so
it's a fascinating example of where um
what he wanted in public um very much is
reflective of what he believed in
private yeah be because communism again
people read actually sit down and read
the manifesto okay I mean you they they
actually call for you know the forcible
overthrow of all existing conditions
that's an actual phrase that's in the
that's in the next to the last par the
problem is is that for many people that
wouldn't be shocking it would actually
be admirable right well seriously
because you know what what we tend to
think is that that if the excesses of
the real revolutionaries were revealed
that people would be less attracted to
them and I'm less optimistic about that
because if people can regard Lucifer
himself as an admirable Rebel the
overreach of the revolutionaries is
actually an attractive part of their
fervor right cuz you're cuz you're
hypothesizing something like an
overarching reason that you could just
appeal to by by contrast and that that
would do the trick it's like it isn't OB
it isn't uh I think that the degree to
which for example the real radical
protesters that are burning down cities
aren't aiming at Burning Down the cities
is Highly Questionable yeah right yeah
so to actually go down and to go down
into the Village Square and just rip
down the statue right to go up and down
the California coast to all the missions
that were founded by St hanip o Sarah
who by the way was canonized by Pope
Francis of all people right to go to
every single Mission and tear them down
right every it's so what are you tearing
down yeah right do you even know who
this guy and what are you trying to put
in place that's right certainly
you sleep is a foundation for our mental
and physical health in other words
you've got to have a consistent
nighttime routine to function at your
best but if you're struggling with sleep
then you've got to check out Beam Beam
isn't your run-ofthe-mill sleep aid it's
a concoction carefully crafted to help
you rest without the grogginess that
often accompanies other sleep remedies a
bunch of us here at the daily wire count
on beam's dream powder to knock us out
and sleep better through the night so we
can show up ready for work the next day
just mix beam dream into hot water or
milk stir or froth and then enjoy before
bedtime then wake up feeling refreshed
without the next day grogginess caused
by other Sleep Products dream contains a
powerful allnatural blend of Rishi
magnesium eleanine appenine and
melatonin to help you fall asleep stay
asleep and wake up refreshed and with it
now being available in delicious flavors
like cinnamon cocoa chocolate peanut
butter and mint chip better sleep has
never tasted better and today listeners
of this show can get a special discount
on beam's dream powder get up to 40% off
for a limited time when you go to shop
beam.com Peterson and use code Peterson
checkout that's shop
for up to 40%
[Music]
off and and in many cases they seem to
be tearing down for the sake of tearing
down absolutely and so this quote from
Marx would go right into this this is in
the next the last paragraph of the
manifesto uh they the Communists openly
declare this is an amazing statement
that their ends can be attained only by
the forcible overthrow of all existing
social conditions so their ends can be
attained only only by the forcible
overthrow of all existing social
conditions and by the way I I don't even
know find me a leftist Who wants to
overthrow absolutely everything I mean
certainly that you know you can name
some things you'd like to keep right
this this guy wanted everything to be
well well it's worse than that so this
isn't just about spreading the wealth
and redistribu this is about forcibly
overthrowing everything well there's two
elements of that three elements of that
are that are appalling right it's
difficult to
differentiate the one that's most
appalling first that it's everything so
it's it's it's it's like a parody of
omniscience and omnip omnipresence and
omnipotence it's everything okay second
it's so it's
everything two let's go for two it's
also not a consequence of a critique
right and it's not
Invitational right it's forcible right
right so so not only do you have the
worship of destru utter destruction you
have the worship of power right now you
remember in in uh when Christ is out in
the desert and tempted by Satan after
the 40 days of of isolation after the
baptism that the third Temptation Of
Satan which is I would say the ultimate
temptation is one of power right now
it's very have all of this right right
it's it's straightforward power and
that's the Temptation that Moses Falls
pray to continually in his work as The
Exodus leader as well it's why he
doesn't get into the Promised Land like
there's a very strict and it's something
that Christ himself forars utterly no
Force no Force regardless of the
provocation yeah now what you have here
in this doctrine that you just described
is not only the desire for Universal
destruction which as you pointed out is
part and parcel of Marx's celebration of
gira's Mephisto me mephistophelian
Doctrine but also allied with worship of
itself because otherwise why the
forcible because he could have written
the overthrow of everything and that
could happen at the level of idea and of
course or even the phrase the end right
uh can only be attained with um with the
end of all yeah but no they want the
force overthrow which which B the
question so so what is it that you want
do you want the end state where
everything's raised to the ground so
that you have a new beginning or do you
want all the absolutely satanic pleasure
of the act of forcible destruction and I
would say if you spend any time at all
analyzing the history of stalinist
Soviet Union including the leninist
period for for for that matter what you
see fundamentally is a celebration of
sadistic Devastation right that's the
fundamental ethos that's the fundamental
goal now the flag waving about the new
Utopia that's going to be created in the
future that's all cover
that's all caml the actual worship is
because the things that happened in
those communist countries are so
appalling that unbeliev well that people
won't pay any attention to them because
they're too much to even contemplate
right and so no one wants to know
anything about them but it seems to me
that the point of dancing naked and
triumphantly in the smoking runes yeah
that's fundamentally the point and if
you happen to be jumping up on down on
the bodies of your enemies and this and
the toppled statues of your culture so
much the better and and wondering how it
goes how the personal matters with like
the public right okay the he the end of
his Manifesto calls for the forcible
overthrow of everything that exists so
that's an actual policy prescription at
the end right we're going to forcibly
overthrow everything that exists and as
we saw in the private that's what he
believes in his life in the poetry so
you see in the Poetry so you see one one
directly leads to the other his um his
hatred of religion right communism
begins where atheism Begins the the the
famous line the opiate of the masses
right that full quote a lot of people
I've heard people say from time to time
well I kind of see what he's getting out
there I religion can be like a sort of
drug for people right maybe like a
placebo maybe like a crutch but if you
read that whole line um religion is the
sigh of the depressed creature it is um
it is the heart of a heartless world it
is the soul of soulless conditions it is
the Opium of the people and then lenon
picked that up and said yeah like Mark
said uh religion is the Opium of the
masses it is a kind of spiritual booze
it is Medieval mildew there is nothing
more abominable than religion and so
what does that mean damn it that means
we're going to shut down the churches
right and we're going to put them in
jail and we're going to be an officially
atheistic country we're going to create
a league of the militant Godless you're
not going to be allowed to to be a
religious person so so the private
thoughts are actually being implemented
and and acted and acted out well the
other thing too about that phrase is
it's actually a lie and it's a lie in
two ways so there's a Canadian
philosopher Taylor who wrote about this
in a book he wrote on identity and he
pointed out that the medieval fear of
hell was at least the equal of the
medieval fear of death okay so that begs
a question is like if your religion is
an
opium then why isn't it just all smiley
faces and and fun yeah right why why
well hell is a really good start it's
like and you know the cynics might say
well hell is a convenient place to put
those you hate but that's you have to be
cynical and naive and stupid to come up
with that theory because you're a fool
if you think that the fear of hell was
anything but real among the Believers in
those periods of time where the reality
of hell was Amplified they were
terrified of that right and so what do
you going to do you're going to do
something convoluted like well you have
to leave the Opium with a bit of Terror
so that it becomes believable enough to
be a soporific it's like hey man your
theory is getting a little convoluted at
that point it's like why bother with
hell and so that to me and it's the same
with the Freudian critique you know that
it's a form of immaturity and over
Reliance on a benevolent father it's
like well the father isn't all
benevolent there's hell and so you
better watch your step and and part of
that is implemented by Terror and then
there's more to it than that and Jesus
said you want to follow me pick up your
cross well that's the next thing it's
like okay so we have Christ the happy
face God who asks people only to believe
that everything is good and there's no
price to be paid for that no that's not
that's exactly that that couldn't be a
bigger lie because there isn't a larger
sacrifice that is possible than the one
that the founder of Christianity
required of himself and his followers
there's nothing in that in the least
that's opiate now you might say well the
happy thought that you go to heaven when
you die is the opiate it's like well
wait a second first of all that only
happens if you've actually lived a good
life and the cost of not doing that is
well now we're back to the hell problem
so I don't buy the the Freudian
interpretation that it's all you know
immature dependence on the heavenly
father so to speak and I certainly don't
buy the Marxist doctrine that there's
anything about it that's opiate now you
could say any any naive person and any
person looking for unearned security
could take any Doctrine and use it as a
security blanket and I think there's
some truth in that but boy if you don't
think that applies to radical leftism as
much as it applies to
Christianity far more than it applies to
Christianity you're not thinking in the
least I mean what you see with the
radical leftists on campus now is that
they make the presumption that all the
leftist theorizing is predicated on an
admirable compassion it's like well if
you want an opiate there's one right
hypers simplification pathological hyper
simplification that's morally
self-serving and and dangerous beyond
belief right right so and and and Mark
said I was just looking for the quote
right now and I couldn't find it but but
one of his criticisms of Christianity
later was he said it preaches um
cowardice uh self-contempt
self-abasement self sacrifice it's like
well yeah I don't know if the preach is
cowardice but but it but it pre those
things don't go in the same category
right exactly no they certainly don't I
know but Christ did didn't lack courage
right right and but but for Mark it was
about the self selfishness and and in
fact that that moment where uh the devil
is tempting Christ right and and and
Christ says them man does not live on
bread alone yes um the marxists actually
acts as if man does live on bread
precisely they they believe that if you
solve the economic problem if you solve
the class problem I mean that's the key
to your Utopia right there it it's it's
if you Augustine said we have a
god-shaped vacuum in in each of us right
but he didn't say we have a dollar
shaped vacuum in each of us but the
Communist they act as if we have a
dollar yeah I know that's that's one of
the other things that's so perverse
about the Communists is that although
hypothetically they're anti- capitalist
they believe that there's an economic
solution to every problema perverse so
yeah so the Communists and the leftists
will say all the time oh you capitalists
all you guys care about money no KL Marx
all you care about is money yeah I mean
all you care about is the m is the
material world it's like they're
fashioning their golden calf out of
money and capital they just think that
if you redistribute wealth If You Can
level the classes if everybody has equal
income right that that uh that's your
key to Utopia right they think man does
live by bread alone yes definitely uh
but but we don't right so their Alpha
and Omega is the economic problem um
U pop Benedict the 16th said the uh you
know the the the the problem with the
Communists is not the communism failed
even so much economically though it did
philosophically though it did but
anthropologically they fail to
understand human nature yeah they fail
to understand people and to just think
that and they put it this simp this
simplistically in the Communist
Manifesto people say all the time give
me a give me a one- sentence definition
of communism okay that's easy cuz Marx
and Engles did it they said the entire
communist Theory or program maybe some
up in the single sentence four words
abolition of private property abolition
of private property they think that you
if if you could abolish private property
you this is the beginning of the key to
your Utopia of all things and that the
utopian Utopia is entirely materialistic
right so one of the things that I found
particularly striking about dovi
especially in Notes from Underground is
he speak of devils and demons yeah yeah
well right absolutely he um he put his
finger on the fundamental flaw in the
Communist Doctrine before I think it was
probably even expressed by Marx at least
popularly expressed I don't exactly know
when Notes from Underground was written
but I don't believe that Mark that dovi
had any direct knowledge of marks at
that point now I'm not certain of that
doesn't matter because the ideas were in
the air anyways right they were so so
but but one of the things that doeski
points out in the Notes from Underground
which is so brilliant is that like he
has this bitter resentful underground
character point out that if you did
provide human beings with the
materialist Utopia that
marks
promoted so that dovi says so that they
had nothing to do but lie in warm pools
of bubbling water and eat cakes and busy
themselves with the continuation of the
species that the people
so benefited would promptly go insane
enough to smash it all to bits just to
have something interesting to do now he
phrases it more bitterly because he he
phrases it as a form of ingratitude but
there's a point there then the point is
that it is the point that man does not
live right by bread alone that dos every
word from from the mouth of God right
well dovi understood that we were built
for something more than infantile
satiation right and more than more for
more than hedonistic satiation and I
would say the marxists Ally very nicely
with the infantile hedonists because
both of them presume that the mere
satiation of Desire yeah would suffice
to bring about the Utopia that's exactly
right right right right that's exactly
right and um maybe this is a kind of
sharp departure look where the marxists
today are right a lot of the marxists
today are not even bothering with class
or economics but they've gone into the
area of culture they've gone into gender
they they've they've gone into race
right yeah and they a lot of the
marxists today if you go to the website
of uh people's World which is the
successor to the Daily worker the and
you go to the about section they have a
call there not for factory workers not
for coal miners I mean the West Virginia
coal miners voting for Trump right not
for steel workers you know my hometown
of Pittsburgh steel workers are probably
large like Maga people a lot of those
guys are blue collar Union guys they
have a call for culture workers
so they're looking they've gone from the
factory floor to the classroom Y and and
so the modern
marxists knowing that the world of the
Communist Manifesto in the industrial
revolution of the 1840s is just
completely gone I that book by the way
um is archaic I mean it it it's written
for 1840s France Germany satanic and and
Britain yeah I me that world doesn't
even exist anymore so a lot of today's
marxists have taken the Marxist
superstructure
of oppressed versus oppressor right and
they said okay it's no longer uh the the
the oppressive Bourgeois and the
oppressed proletariat and the
proletariat would be the oppressed group
that would be the victim class and also
the Redeemer class right by the stripes
of the proletariat you were healed right
they would usher in the revolution so
instead people don't I mean what young
people today even know what the word
proletariat or bourgeois mean they've
taken the oppressed oppressor model and
they've applied it to issues like race y
it's exactly right and and so the so the
oppressor and this is the most
simplistic infantile thing anybody could
do the race-based critical race
theorists to take human beings who are I
mean you know do I've done my DNA
ancestry.com my family is just they're
all over the place in terms of their DNA
right U to boil people down in America
in the 2020s as okay two categories
black white right how do you do that I
mean my youngest son who's adopted is is
black um actually his mother's white his
father's black um so is Obama so he's
he'd be considered black right but if
you do his DNA test he's all over the
place but the modern critical race
theorist is going to say white oppressor
black oppress and they're going to
hammer you into one of those two
categories which Martin Luther King Jr
said no we're to be judged by the
content of our character not the color
of our skin um CRT which I I interviewed
David gero the king biographer about
this and he said um CRT predates King
King was shot in April 1968 so he didn't
talk about CRT but he would have been
totally against any kind of race based
classification of human beings so the
modern group is is hammering you into
one of these two categories oppressed
versus oppressor so the new oppressed
group will be blacks and they need to
have their Consciousness raised they
need to know that they are the oppressed
group uh they will Usher in the
Redemption they're also the Redeemer
class and try telling somebody like
Oprah Winfrey or Kobe Bryant that
they're oppressed just because they're
black I mean how racist is that whereas
the white homeless guy that he's the
oppressor because he's white is an un
unbelievably ridiculous infantile absurd
racist separation of human beings into
opposing hostile camp and by the way it
divides people and back to Marx this is
what Marx and Engles did with with CLA
well so you
that took us a field and I don't think
it did because tell me what you think
about this because this ties maybe the
close of our discussion to the beginning
because we talked about essentially
theological matters in relationship to
Marx's fantasizing okay so imagine that
there's there's a theological element to
Marks that can be traced all the way
back to the story of Kan and Abel
because Kan and Abel is the first victim
victimizer narrative right and Cain
feels that he's the victim of Abel yeah
and he is driven by a bitter resentment
by way Envy which is what Marxism is all
about absolutely and he becomes
extremely hostile okay
so imagine that Marxism is essentially a
retelling of the story of Cain and Abel
with Cain as the protagonist okay so now
so once you get that then you can see
what's happened with the modern metam
marxists because we might
think being slightly older we might
think that the core doctrine of Marxism
is economic inequality but it's not the
core Doctrine is victim victimizer right
now what Marx said was the Prime
dimension of victim victimizer is
economic now I think and this is partly
why Marxism was powerful if you have to
pick a victim victimizer narrative the
most powerful one is economic let's just
leave that aside now you said well we no
longer have the dark satanic Mills so
the economic story isn't playing out as
wellb but the victim victimizer
narrative that's still alive and what
the I think of the new postmodern
leftism as a metastasized Marxism yeah
because it's the victim victimizer
narrative that's now multi-dimensional
you can take any way you can possibly
categorize human beings that divides
them into groups and you can take that
dichotomous Dimension and you can say
victim victimizer right so now you
explain everything right then you can
say so you can explain everything you
got no more work to do cognitively and
you can learn that in 10 minutes right
but then there's an additional advantage
and this is also endemic to Marxism
imagine that you have two problems to
solve in the world is one is to
understand it and the other is to figure
out how to conduct yourself in it okay
well the victim victimizer narrative
gives you both because not only have you
now a complete causal explanation
everything can be understood in terms of
power because that's the victim
victimizer story but goodness merely
requires that you identify with the
victim right right right so it's solves
your moral problem too right and so
exactly and so what we have is the
spectacle of the modern
universities uh what would you say
promulgating this meta Marxism metastic
Marxism where they've fragmented The
oppressor oppressor Narrative into
multiple Dimensions even if they don't
know it's Marxist and exactly exactly
well and it's not if it's a retelling of
the can and abble story it's deeper than
Marxism right Marxism would then become
a variant of something even deeper and I
I think what is deeper is the victim
victimizer narrative that way of
construing the world and that is a way
of like the postmodernist especially
people like fuk Cole it's all about
power life can be unpredictable but a
good life insurance plan gives your
family a financial safety net to protect
against some of the unknowns policy
genius is the country's leading online
insurance Market place it makes choosing
the right policy for your family easy
and quick with policy genius you can
find life insurance policies that start
at just $292 per year for $1 million of
coverage some options offer same day
approval and avoid unnecessary medical
exams maybe you already have a life
insurance policy through work but that
might not offer enough protection for
your family's needs and it may not
follow you if you leave your job you
need a backup plan policy genius has
licensed agents who can help you find
the best fit for your needs when they
make it this easy there's no excuse not
not to do it policy genius works for you
not the insurance companies that means
they're not incentivized to recommend
one insurer over another so you can
trust their guidance get Peace of Mind
by finding the right life insurance with
policy genius head to policygenius.com
Jordan or click the link in the
description to get your free life
insurance quotes and see how much you
could save that's policy genius.com
Jordan and they're and they're always in
search um this kind of modern post
Market whatever they're always in search
for the next victim group y right that
that that's the key who's the next
victim class and once you're in that
group you that group has to be taught to
hate the other group I I I mean to to
for them to know that they are a victim
because of that group that's right
that's and and and if you don't get that
if you don't understand that you need
your Consciousness this is where the
university TR to teach that's right and
and if you're in the oppressor group and
you don't realize you're an oppressor
right um You might be in that class you
say well you know I was brought up
actually in a multi-racial family with
we've got adopted kids and we uh it's
like no no no no no you've got to
understand your skin color defines you
and put you in that camp right the
oppressor or your sexuality or your
gender I mean what could be worse than
as simple as you know male female right
gender marxists yeah uh but but that
that's unfortunately that allows you to
multiply the dimensions of Oppression
too which is very convenient if you want
to rationalize the power narrative and
you also want to claim Mor moral virtue
without doing any work that's right I'm
on the side of the victims it's like
really are you really now you're really
on the side of the victims and you're
sure you've got the victims properly
identified and they're only victims and
they're in a power position too they're
in the they're in the position to Define
who's the victim and who's not and those
are always the people during the
revolution that are going to be in
charge this what lenon called the
Vanguard right and in what is to be done
in 1902 he he said what's needed here is
a Cadre of revolutionaries kind of
educated Elites who can run this whole
thing who can who can who can run the
project and tell you when you've gone
from feudalism to capitalism to
socialism to Communism right they're the
same ones that tell you when it's new
time time for a new pride flag now
that's right that's right seems to be
about every week that's right they're
the managers and and and and we stop and
say you know I don't get this
everybody's supposed to be equal in
wealth but Castro I mean doctors
janitors baseball players custodians all
get $120 a year in Cuba Castro is worth
a billion dollars right look at the doas
on the Black Sea that all the Communist
apparat have in the S Soviet Union look
at the Kims look how look how much money
they well you have to understand for
them they're the rulers right the
Marxism the communism is for the ruled
not the rulers it's for the masses not
the Masters right it's for all of you
idiots well there's also no evidence
technically from the economic
perspective that the Communist Communist
governments had any impact whatsoever on
inequality oh yeah no other than making
everybody equally well well that's the
thing is there was less to go around
right so they were very good at
suppressing the benefits of capital but
were able to address inequality not at
all yes by well and by destruction but
they were not able to address inequality
at all no right they nationalize
everything including uh poverty yeah
yeah yeah yeah okay so what let's close
with this a more personal
reflection your book about Marx is a
rather personal analysis of marks and
that makes it as you pointed out
somewhat unique especially in its
concentration on his motivations let's
say in his poetic motivations his
revelatory motivations what has that
done to you personally in your
understanding of Marx and let's also
your understanding of the world because
there's a very strange theological
Dimension to your analysis of marks okay
so so was that theological dimens
mention there before you wrote this book
partly I suppose well yeah I think I
think it probably was already there I
mean I've always thought Jordan that um
when people ask me uh how did Communism
catch on right even well F first of all
it's never voted into power and if it is
they they don't stand for another
election right I mean Fidel Castro
called for democracy and free and fair
elections in 1959 right and it never
actually had them right the Kims don't
put them themselves themselves up for
for for election but the the what's the
rational reason why anybody if you just
read The Communist Manifesto It's so
clear that this is completely
impractical it can't possibly work U I
think there I think there's almost a
kind of a diabolical explanation for
this you know Ronald Reagan said um in
you in in the in the grand Destiny of
humanity we are not matters of mere
material computation right when great
for are are on the foot in the world we
learn that we are spirits not animals
right um the that and I think there's
almost a spiritual explanation behind
this so you it doesn't it doesn't make
mere rational sense that this idea could
have ever been fostered or caught on I I
think there's a diabolical
explanation right so you basically you
basically believe that the Marxist
phenomena cannot be underst stood
outside an overarching religious
interpret frame so and and I think
that's right and we haven't mentioned
the very opening words of the manifesto
a spectre is haunting Europe the Spectre
of Communism no kidding yeah and it says
all the old allies of Europe um Pope and
Zar metnick and gizo German and French
uh French radicals and German spies have
entered into a holy Alliance to exercise
the Spectre marks and Eng Les open the
book with with paragraph describing it
as a spectre a demonic Spectre that
needs exercise now again like well
they're being playful with words yeah
right no there's too much of this
there's too much of this there's
something deeper and dark good J
contains his a seed of the truth well in
in my experience for what it's worth it
was the horrors of Communism that
motivated me to think much more deeply
about religious matters because if you
if you familiar iiz yourself with the
hell of the Communist regimes you end up
at a level of analysis I think that you
you can't avoid at a level of analysis
that demands that you account for an
evil that profound right yeah I was at I
was in agnostic in college and close to
being an atheist and studying this stuff
in the end of the Cold War is part of
what pulled me out of that pit uh
because you really do look at it and you
say this is this seems demonic this
seems
diabolical uh you another quote from
Reagan uh this isn't a matter of rockets
and economics this this is a something
of the spiritual order you know there's
something deeper darker going on here
yeah no I think I I I can't see how you
can be I also think that that's a motif
that found which is Carl Marx yeah right
right right I think that there's a
reflection in that of the Dragon
treasure dichotomy you know we know from
time in Memorial that you go searching
for Treasure where the dragons are and
there isn't a dragon that's more
terrifying than the dragon that's the
spirit of malevolence itself and you
cannot study communism without
encountering the spirit of malevolence
and then the treasure that lurks there
is something like a recognition that the
overarching religious framework is
actually necessary to conceptualize the
problem properly and probably to offer
something approximating a solution like
an genuine solution yeah I I think I
think that's exactly right yeah there's
um there's a church in cyclical Divinity
redemptor from 19 uh 37 by Pas I 11 and
and they described it as a satanic
Scourge orchestr orchestrated by the
sons of Darkness I mean the the the
church then came to that conclusion that
they believe that everything that the
Communists wanted and said and wrote in
their books can only be interpreted in
this really dark demonic sense what do
The Liberation theologists think of that
oh yeah they're they're nuts I mean
they're um yeah they're powerful nuts
they are still and um even someone like
Pope Francis U said in December 2013 he
said the Marxist ideology is wrong uh
but have that having been said he's not
a very good
anti-communist right I mean well it's a
it's a very powerfully contaminating
force and its tendrils are everywhere
and not necessarily that easy to
identify that's exactly especially if
you don't really want to look yeah and
if you tell somebody you know what
you're engaging in there could be a form
of Marxism applied to culture Frankfurt
School Antonio gry cultural hemony
founders of the Frankfurt School Max
Simer Theodore adorno wrote about the
culture industry and the dialectic of
Enlightenment you know this is a kind of
Marxism applied to culture they look up
cultural Marxism it pops up anti-semitic
conspiracy theory so well what's that
right but but but you know it's it it's
it's to the point where it's infiltrated
things where people engaging in the
framework or meta narrative or Marxist
superstructure on gender race culture
whatever often don't even know that
they're guilty of it which they're you
know credit to them they don't know it
but it's it's so seeped in to the
culture at large that yeah this what
we're dealing with y y y all right sir
hey this was great thanks so much thank
you very much yeah well there were many
other things too that we could have
talked about too I would have liked to
have talked about your work on Reagan
and your other books as well but we may
save that for a further discussion this
was worth the devotion of 90 minutes to
I would say just this topic so I'm very
glad that we did it me too glad too and
for everybody watching and listening on
the YouTube side we're very happy for
your time and attention as well and to
the film crew here we're at the Museum
of the Bible which is a very appropriate
place to be having this discussion in
Washington DC um that's a museum whose
work I did a documentary on for the
daily wire which I think is quite a
success ful documentary and was a great
joy to actually produce and it's a great
museum so if you ever do happen to come
to DC um go check it out it's it's uh
it's the kind of place that can help you
understand a lot more deeply the
relationship between at minimum the
relationship between the fact of the
Bible and the fact of literacy itself in
its worldwide distribution because those
two things are very integrally
Associated and that's a underappreciated
contribution of CHR Christianity and
protestantism to the world so anyways
thanks to the Museum of the Bible for
hosting us today and uh I'm going to
continue this discussion for another
half an hour on the daily W side and
what we'll talk about is what I often
talk about on that in that additional
half an hour which is the development of
the interests that underly this this
body of work devoted not least to the
catastrophe of Marxism and communism so
join us there
[Music]